blog post for MatchLabelKeys in PodAffinity (#46833)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2024-xx-xx-matchlabelkeys-podaffinity.md

---
layout: blog
title: 'Kubernetes 1.31: MatchLabelKeys in PodAffinity graduates to beta'
date: 2024-XX-XX
slug: matchlabelkeys-podaffinity
author: >
  Kensei Nakada (Tetrate)
---

Kubernetes 1.29 introduced new fields `MatchLabelKeys` and `MismatchLabelKeys` in PodAffinity and PodAntiAffinity.

In Kubernetes 1.31, this feature moves to beta and the corresponding feature gate (`MatchLabelKeysInPodAffinity`) gets enabled by default.

> ## `MatchLabelKeys` - accurate scheduling during rolling upgrades

Reviewer: `accurate` doesn't sound accurate lol... It's more like adding a new feature/knob to adapt to wider/more practical usecases. Can we use a better word here?

Author: > ## `MatchLabelKeys` - Enabling version-aware scheduling for rolling upgrades

How does it sound now?

Reviewer: How about:

> `MatchLabelKeys` - enhanced scheduling for versatile rolling upgrades

Author: Done.

> During rolling upgrades, a cluster may have Pods from multiple versions of a Deployment. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During a workload's (e.g., Deployment) rolling upgrade, a cluster may have Pods from multiple versions at the same time. 
```

> This makes it challenging for the scheduler to distinguish between them based on the `LabelSelector` specified in PodAffinity or PodAntiAffinity. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the scheduler cannot distinguish between old and new versions based on the `LabelSelector` specified in PodAffinity or PodAntiAffinity. As a result, it will co-locate or disperse Pods regardless of their versions.
```

> This can lead to suboptimal scheduling, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can lead to sub-optimal scheduling outcome, for example:
```

> - New version Pods are placed near old version Pods (PodAffinity), which will eventually be removed after rolling upgrades.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- New version Pods are co-located with old version Pods (PodAffinity), which will eventually be removed after rolling upgrades.
```

> - Old version Pods are spread out, and new version Pods cannot find nodes due to PodAntiAffinity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Old version Pods are distributed across all available topologies, preventing new version Pods from finding nodes due to PodAntiAffinity.
```

`MatchLabelKeys` addresses this problem.
`MatchLabelKeys` is a set of Pod label keys, 

> and the scheduler looks up the values of these keys from the new Pod's labels and combines them with `LabelSelector` 

Reviewer: +1
